Hi, I'm Maria Vendettuoli. I'm a Senior Statistical Programmer at Fred Hutch in the Statistical
Center for HIV AIDS Research and Prevention. At RStudioCon 2020, my colleague Ellis Hughes
shared technical details demonstrating how our organization is tackling the challenge
of software validation for R packages. It's now a year later. We have three packages released
and are tackling the extended challenge of ensuring that our entire verse is fit for
purpose as an integrated unit. Today, I'll be sharing my thoughts regarding multi-package
development in the pharma environment. My first recommendation is to set the team up
for success by getting infrastructure in order. Moving away from historical validation practices
means updating or generating new SOPs. Another area for infrastructure support is to establish
common development guidelines that get shared across all packages. This is especially important
if packages are implementing legacy code that was previously siloed. The ultimate benefit,
however, is code portability within the overall project. My next recommendation is the need
to address development from an empathy perspective. At SHARP, we observe four distinct roles.
One, users rapidly processing data. These would be primarily statistical programmers.
Two, data analysts reviewing code for context. These would be individuals who need to be
able to rapidly assess context from function names alone. Three, stakeholders interacting
with functions solely from the package validation report. So, this could be someone involved
in writing specifications and test cases but aren't participating in coding activity. Four,
package developers and maintainers who seek to eliminate duplication or re-implementation
with package updates. Now, one common need that transcends all of these user groups is
to have a vocabulary which allows us to place functions within the larger context of assay-specific
data processing tasks. That is, we want to survey what has been implemented, filter either
by assay or task, and call up help page documentation on demand. So, this is actually a reference
to Schneiderman's information-seeking mantra, which is typically cited in visualization
literature. In this context, we are treating the function names as the identifying handle
and leveraging RStudio's autocomplete as the filtering mechanism as we navigate to
a particular help page or call the function. For example, one step of data processing that
occurs for all assays is the transformation to a CDISC Atom basic data structure. Because
of the function naming convention we have chosen, a list of all available BDS transformation
functions are displayed and we can select for the assay of interest.
Focusing on the package validation elements, we also need a systematic approach to how
we map package requirements, test cases, and test code files. Validation is a form of user
acceptance testing, where we have to show that for every software requirement there
was an appropriate test successfully executed. The modular approach we use at SHARP is incredibly
flexible, which has the development benefits I will discuss later, but it does require
some organization to track. In addition to enforcing a file naming convention, we also
scrape these files to generate a tabular display in the validation report, which links requirements
and tests. Between these two implementations, both developers and validation report stakeholders
are able to verify at a glance that complete coverage exists.
The last couple recommendations I have address the topic of technical debt. You may be wondering,
why are we splitting assays into separate packages? A couple reasons. First, FDA guidance
asks us to revalidate the entire system when one element changes. Now, change is expected,
input data structures get updated, analysis needs drift. However, an update to one assay
type should not introduce the appearance of change affecting other assays. Secondly, from
the user perspective, we need to put some conceptual structures around processes. Sure,
every data set will be converted to BDS, but the definition of that basic data structure
will vary from assay to assay, and we need to capture that distinction in a manner that
is easy to digest. What we also want to avoid is excessive re-implementation. As we have
expanded to multiple assay packages, we have identified utility functions that can be shared
and moved into their own foundation package. We can enforce package code dependencies through
routine use of the description file, but the power of modular validation means that we
can move the associated specifications, test cases, and test code files as well. Validation
of the lighter assay package with the new utility package is simply compiling the R
markdown document without any need to rewrite content. Likewise, when we need to add additional
specifications, test cases, or test code to an existing package, an updated validation
report will add the new child documents to existing sources. This has the added benefit
of being able to use a simple diff to compare validation reports across package versions.
So, I wanted to take a moment to thank those who made this work possible, especially the
preceding efforts by Ellis Hughes and the combined contribution of the SHARP pData
standardization team. Future work includes formalizing our validation practice
through a FUSE-ORG collaboration with deliverables expected later in 2021.